Hello. How is everyone doing tonight?
>> You don't have
>> Well, my name is Jeff. I'm the first of
Tom.
>> I actually have a pulse.
I I was uh elected with 512 votes. So, a
lot of you had to vote for me and that's
about 7% of my electorate. So, just let
you all know my wife and I do pay our
taxes unlike some people that like to
throw stones. Okay.
>> All right. So,
before we get started, I just want to do
the same thing I did last time. Um we
will not be we will descent. It has to
be a good discourse, not a poor
discourse. It's all about working
together. Um, you know, when we work
together, good things happen. Like the
bathroom project that's going to happen
here at the school is going to save
$260,000,
not 260, $200,000
uh because we worked together. And it
wasn't easy to get it done, but we did
work together. All right. So, things
good can happen if we work together. So
before I read this in everybody needs to
know there's there's things we're doing.
First thing we're going to do is elect
to model that. The second thing we're
going to do is the board of finance is
going to start running me and then we do
a presentation. The third thing we're
going to do is ask some questions to any
of the boards. You can ask questions
whatever you want. And then what's going
to happen is we're going to adjourn.
There will be no motions that we'll be
able to undertake. No reductions of
anything that's been done by the board
of finance. what the board of finance
has put forth is going to go away on the
26th. All right. So, long as we all
understand the game plan. All right. So,
my requirement is to read the notice and
we get it started.
Um, notice of bifocating budget meeting
Tuesday, May 12th, 2026, 7 p.m. The
electors and citizens qualified to vote
in town meetings at the town of Andover
are hereby notified by the bifurcated
budget meeting of the town of Andover
will be held at the Andover Elementary
School in the gymnasium, 35 school road,
Andover, Connecticut on Tuesday, May
12th at 7 p.m. for the following
purposes. to choose a moderator for city
meeting for review and discussion of
only no action upon the bifurcated
budgets of the town and the handover
elementary school for the fiscal year
July 1st 2026 to June 30th 2027 as
prepared by the board of finance and
voting will be deferred to the budget
referendum in the handover town
community room May 26th also we will
adjourn the proposed vice budgets of the
town are available in town clerk's
office voting by abs ballot or any other
meetings is not permitted for this
meeting.
So, we're going to get started and um
we're going to sit there and do item one
to choose a moderator for set meeting.
I like to second that.
>> Um so, Liz Latchet did the nomination
and who?
>> Louise.
>> Louise did a second. Does anybody have a
a further nomination for moderator?
Okay. So, uh if there are
>> Sorry, sorry. If there are no other
nominations, uh we're going to let in
the take over meeting.
>> Good evening. Hello, welcome.
Um, we will just jump right in, but out
of curiosity, how many of you did get to
attend the finance meeting after maybe
after the referendum failed? Is there
anybody on that? Yes. Yes. Just curious.
Just curious.
So, some of this won't be brand new, but
a lot of Okay. So, gentlemen over the
guidelines. Um, also, we'll hand it over
to Mr. with for letting us know how this
is going, but also when we come to the
speaking part, we're going to have
everybody come here and use the mic
instead of running around with the mic.
>> And as usual, it'll be an address and
also just that, you know, there's a
saying, we can't necessarily control the
wind, but we can set our sales. So
tonight is sort of part by setting sails
that we're asking questions, getting
clarification, we're um sharing
opinions. We will keep it to three
minutes, but please, you know, add your
add your two cents to the audition.
>> It's yours. Turn off the light so you
can see better.
>> Yeah. You can actually see.
Hello everybody. We're back here. Robin
on the board chair there. Too many
lights.
>> It's not those stories. It's It's
budget. It's budget.
>> It is those choice.
>> Apologies if I look down here in my lap
time. I'm not all that confident. So,
one thing I want to mention is rather
some of this because we've done it
already. Uh for those of you not here
though, there is this is just a basic
budget process slide. We go over the
various budget requests um from the
various town departments and the school
boards. And then I'm going to run you
through what we did on the 6 at the
board finals meeting following failing
referendum and my revised math on mil
race. People are usually interested in
that. Bear in mind those are all
provisional
uh and some sample property tax
calculations.
So uh this is what's happened so far.
I've added two. The first bit of this is
no not news to any of you who've been
following along. Uh what happened of
course is that when the budgets failed
um spoke indicated in the um advisory
questions they felt the budgets were too
high. So now the budget binder becomes
split. So we vote on it separately from
now on. Um so we took this issue these
issues up at our meeting on the 6th uh
to review and discuss changes and then
we'll be taking this budget to
referendum as Jeff said on the 26th.
Some things that have changed since
uh the first thing that came down
interestingly enough was the state
decided to allocate additional aid to
cities and towns. Our share of this is
listed here and I hope you can read it,
but basically it's $80,000 towards
education and 17.7
you know 51 uh in supplemental town B.
My understanding is since the ed budget
is rising um you know we can use that to
to frame it and there's been some back
and forth on state guidance on that but
my belief is that the latest and
greatest is that we're from there. So,
the board of finance went through the
town budget again. Uh, we made some
relatively modest cuts on the town side,
on the town operations budget. $16,400.
Little changes here, little changes
there. Uh, $5,000 reduced for the town
administrative assistant line. We
thought that we'd be okay getting away
with that. 5K from treasurer clerk
wages. again discussing kind of with the
treasurer about the open position and uh
programs at the um community center. I
think testing it due uh with the number
that we ultimately arrived at and then
there was a little bit of a a very small
cut to the recognition.
Then we looked at um the school budget
which somehow my lightability item here
didn't make it. Um, we reduced $50,000
from the school budget, basically triple
the cuts on the tariff side and then we
voted to use $100,000 from a side fund
balance to defay taxation. Again,
apologies for not having that bullet
point on as we did reduce it by 50,000.
We also talked about another thing that
hasn't, you know, action has not been
taken on yet. So, I only put in the
signal here forformational purposes. The
number is not in the calculations. Uh,
the 425 audit is just about done. We
should have some money coming back from
um the budget which we could use. Uh but
we have not voted on that.
Uh as you know both RAM budget their
capital and ops they're meeting as I
understand it as a city to address. I
can't tell you what's going to happen.
Um I got a text they may have made
$100,000 cuts and you know I'm not
watching that meeting. I hope that's
true. But that those numbers are not as
I could possibly have known going into
this.
So,
oops. Sorry. So, here's my little chart
of our expenditures. Again, as I think I
read you guys through our last meeting,
the RAM number, this is the true number
for their our levy, right? not counting
as many of you probably heard the the
returning money that that they are
giving us back because they kept money
for five years that they should have
kept 258 is accounted for but it's not
in this expenditure line item which it
doesn't belong there
budget versus the adjustable so you've
seen it go up by 3.5 the end of her BE
this reflects a $50,000 cut
that still leaves it as plus 9.8 more
So, this is I, you know, I went through
this last time. I'm gonna, again, if
people want me to go over this again, I
will. Otherwise, I'm going to kind of
speed through my little history
documents here and get you to
changes. Again, as I just said, $15,000
cut brings us down to 9.8 on the school
side.
>> Okay, this is RAM. Nothing has changed
on this side. Uh, hopefully they've made
a a decent cut. we have a 12.65% share
of whatever their budget is. That's the
key thing to I think keep in mind.
>> So those are again budget history
documents. We can go over them if you
want to.
>> Miller, Robert,
>> could you slow?
>> There are people
myself hard hearing
>> and some of it is the acoustics and some
of it is just the rapidity. Yes.
>> Oh, saving money inside.
>> Just just just so you know, like the
heart of hearing, myself and my father,
we have a really hard time hearing
because of the rever.
>> Yeah.
>> In the gym, the echo does not go well
with hearing aids and I don't wear a
hearing aid. So, I am completely deaf in
my left side.
>> So, just think really
>> that's true for everybody from Alabama.
>> I'll take my
best I can.
>> Thank you.
>> So, we can revisit any of the stuff that
I already talked about that you might
have missed. Back me up in a question.
Happy to do that. Apologies for my
being.
So, as you guys may remember, if you
were here last time following the
process,
there calculation is a little
complicated. If we go over a certain
figure, the state of Connecticut a
couple of years back capped how much you
can charge on auto tests.
We are at this present moment just
slightly above that threshold which
results in a split mill rating. It's
pretty min and I think by the time the
RAM situation is sorted out, we'll be
under this number again. But again, I
made the presentation at 4 p.m. today.
So this is my chart of the norm and how
it's calculated. We know we need to
raise by taxes just over $10.4 million
and that is applied to our grand list
and it results sorry down here in a
split mill rate. Again like I said the
auto is capped at 32.46. You kind of
have to calculate that take it off the
top and then find the number for the
remaining the real estate and personal
product the rest of the green. list. And
that's 32.
>> Robert, can you make it bigger? Can you
make it?
>> Yeah, I'm gonna try to. I hope it
doesn't cut everything off. Hang on a
moment.
>> Just put a tissue.
>> Yeah, that's easier.
>> Sure.
>> Does that Does that help
>> a little bit? I know there's a lot of
numbers on there. I apologize.
The the answer is for the number that
most impacts everybody. It's right now
this budget would be 32.57
on a million. Again, the auto slightly
lower, but auto is minuscule in
comparison, I think, to most people's
house, right?
So, this is just how I calculate. This
is just literally the basic method. The
auto is capped. We cannot raise more
than this figure here, right? because of
the state law. So then that's how I
arrived up to 32.57. And again, I would
simply express that that doesn't
actually get set until after the
passive. And in between now and then, if
Ram makes the cut than I hope they're
making, if the state suddenly changes
and pumps more money in it, then we
would of course address it.
So these this is an updated version of a
slide I had last time to just give you a
sense for at this rate level what real
estate taxation would look like visa v
last year. So depending on what your
assessment is, and again I answered this
last time real quick,
your houses are are assessed at whatever
the their supposed fair market value is
at 70% of that figure. If your house is
worth $500,000, you're assessed at 350,
right? 70%.
So if you are at that 350 that's your
assessment the tax increase this budget
will require as currently written is
$343 a year and it'll be a few months on
the auto not
uh oh we did we I did have this slide so
as you can see depending on what how
nice your cars are uh it's literally 15
20 25 bucks it's nothing compared to
this is where the need
But anyway, in the interest and a full
disclosure, that's how it works.
So, this is just my history slide.
Again, I've updated it. I also want to
point out that the last time I did this
slide, I had an error in it because I
used an old formula. When I created the
cumulative, whoops, the cumulative
number for the last five years, not
including this bucket, I had originally
had it in my head that I would do a
rolling average, and I left that number
in. It was wrong. General actually point
out the very first question that got
meaning he was correct. I had a math
error my fault. Thanks to that guy
helped me correct it. Uh the overall
number was right but the the last the
5year 21 to 26 was wrong. So this is the
undead. So if this budget passes over
the last six fiscal years you know
inclusive of this budget the tax
increase would be 2.6%. to be raised by
taxation. That does not mean your
individual taxes because majority are
revalued valuations can fluctuate
depending on what's going on with the
property. I should also mention I do
believe next year is our reval year. So
uh this we haven't had an evaluation in
town for 5 years now I think and
normally this year but it's next year
now the state I think backed it up one
year on us. that will change everything
once that helps.
>> Um, so that's our presentation.
Um, I know about as much about the state
money as anybody does, which is to say
it's been emails flying back and forth
from various people trying to get there.
I genuinely think I have on my arms. But
just be aware it was very last. The
state does do that sometime
unfortunately. So, I will get there. I
don't want to take up the whole time
this and we'll get to questions and
hopefully answer.
>> So, we're going to have folks come up
unless you can't and then we'll bring it
to you microphone, please.
>> Thank you. I would like to amend the
rules for this meeting uh stated by
Judge McGuire the moderator to include
not only during the public speaking not
only questions but to add comments as
well. So we're able to make comments
rather than just questions.
I we did say that.
So, is everyone the end of the weekend?
Let's ask that we include not only
questions but also uh thoughts and
considerations.
>> Yeah.
>> Sure.
>> Three minutes.
>> Anyone over there?
>> Can I come up to you?
>> You come up
to her.
Yeah. All
right.
>> Name and address.
>> Oh, my name is George Conrad. I live at
117 Link Drive.
>> You have a little
>> There you go.
>> Um,
when I wrote my letter to the editor, I
was contacted
>> when I wrote my letter to the editor, I
was contacted by Dary Ball.
Um, and she sent me a message request
and it said,
"If you have found any superintendent of
school contracts that is lower than
mine, I would like to bring that to the
attention of the board of education
uh to be considered." Neither myself nor
the board could find any.
And
I did some research
and what I found was, let me get to that
screen
is it says part-time school
superintendent salaries for small towns
under 44,000
population in Connecticut typically
average between 40,000 and 125,000
according to PARs connection media
analysis
while full-time
large district
is very small so roles exceed 200,000
these part-time
often multi- town or smaller districts
lower compensation
with some part that contacts
in contracts in Lichfield County pay
from 36,000
to 95,000. The average is 65,500.
And we have part-time
superintendent who I'm told gets
full-time benefits.
if that's right. And I feel since the
board of education gave her that raise,
they should find the difference
in their own budget instead of making
the town taxpayers
pay for that raise.
I'm sure she's worth it, but not in a
small town like Andover. Thank you.
When you put that into AI, it doesn't
give you superintendent of schools
salaries by district. We have gone
through the districts and 65,000 is not
the salary. So again, I do encourage you
to find a specific contract for a
district and bring it to the board of
education because we did go through them
and that is why both the board of
finance had a conversation and the board
of education and going through them and
it is still the lowest salary in the
state.
So, I absolutely would love to see them.
If you missed one and I believe in that
message I said I do, if you do find a
specific contract, please bring it to
the board of education. And again, there
wasn't a town contract there for us to
consider, but please, I know Lynchfield
is not um a contract that is lower than
nine, but I wouldn't encourage if we
found another one to bring it to the
board because that just isn't the case.
65,000 is not accurate. Sure.
>> Also, if anyone is interested, I'm at
Katie Greenhouse for those of you who
don't know, I am the head of the board
of ed. Um, if anyone is interested, if
you personally want me to email you um,
a graph that compares the salaries for
superintendent according to a point two,
so that everything is equated, right,
for a full-time versus a part-time for
our town and similar towns. So like the
towns that are in our DRG where we're
listed as well as the towns that are
surrounding us, I'm more than happy to
email that to people individually. Um
>> like what is the word?
>> Yeah. So sorry that compares like the
the district area for towns that are
similar to our town. Um so if you guys
want that information, I'm more than
happy um to email it email it to you.
It's a It's a graph that that shows all
of them.
>> Kaylin, could you share with us the
action contracts that we're that we want
help with just a graph?
>> Uh the contracts are all posted on the
AES website. There's a contract. the
contracts the contracts that you use to
prepare
>> for the superintendent. Not not
>> I I'm not going to email you like
contracts from 20 times. Is that what
you're asking for? You guys can also
find them.
>> Okay. So, we can do the work. Instead,
we can just sharing it and working
together.
>> Yes. And sharing the summary of that
information, which is far more valuable.
>> Okay. Anybody's okay?
>> I I believe a member of your board did
do that as well.
>> Sorry.
>> Can I just ask a question rather than
get
>> the question is just really will that
include the number of students in each
of the superintendent districts?
>> No.
>> Um are you able to
just asked are you able to offer a
comparison that would look at not just
superintendent salary but superintendent
salaries in town districts of 200 or
less. How would you help them?
>> Yeah. So the comparison is actually and
I can list all the all the towns out but
it's comparing us to towns that are near
us. So like he and Marboro as well as
towns that are similar to us like Salem.
Um, and in terms of comparison, it's not
based on the number of students that the
superintendent is overseeing. It's based
on how many hours they work. So, are
they a 2,46?
So, you're taking the salary amount and
equilibrating to like how much would
that would that salary earn if it was a
2.
>> If you want to speak, you need to come
up and you need to say your name in that
rules.
>> Yes.
Sorry, I intended to My name is Kathleen
Barrett and I live at 44 Lakeside Drive
and I intended to speak but really there
just wanted to ask the question so that
I was confident that we were comparing
apples to apples as we were looking at
and evaluating the superintendent
salary. Um, and I guess I would also ask
the question, was there a raise of 11%
this year in the in the budget for the
superintendent salary or am I mistaken
by that? If that is correct, I would ask
us all to consider is it 11% raise? If
it is, then if it is, then I would ask
us all to ask the question, when was the
last time we had an 11% raise in our
salary? And it's about my similar.
>> So yes, it is an 11% raise for the
superintendent. I hope that we don't
spend the whole meeting on this. Do you
know that the town treasurer also got a
33% raise in the upcoming budget? So she
is not the only employee to get a large
raise. And I will tell you it doesn't
have to do with Valerie directly, right?
She's phenomenal. She's a great
superintendent, but it's also about our
town being competitive when and if we
have to go hire another superintendent
so that we can actually hire lunch.
Um, thank you.
I'm glad you're here.
>> Thank you. I come to this as a mother um
who loves children. I come to this as a
citizen who loves my community. And I
hope that we will be able to find a way
to negotiate and talk together and work
through perhaps new solutions than the
solutions we've found so far. When I
looked at the size of the uh Andover
budget um for the elementary school, um
I did some research and I looked and I
asked a question. Oh, I forgot to say
I'm also a former elementary school
counselor and I was a school counseling
professor for just shy of 20 years. Um,
and so I would ask as we ask ourselves
the question, what shall we do to deal
with this problem that many small
communities like ours face that sees
shrinking enrollment um which is
happening all over the state and all
over the all over the country really.
the decisions that we make now are
decisions that um are decisions that are
going to come back to us uh several
years from now. But we I hear a lot of
talk about class sizes and what the
ceiling should be and is a class size of
10 to 12 something that's really good
for our children. And I would say to you
to do a little research and look and
perhaps you'll find that
a size of 10 to 12 for students in early
elementary school grades kindergarten
through three is wonderful. It's great
if a town is wealthy enough to be able
to offer that. But for children in
grades four, five, and six, I do not
believe in my heart that that smallsiz
classroom is a benefit. I think it's a I
think it's a disadvantage disguised as a
benefit because kids in the middle
childhood gearing. They're developing
socially. They're developing
academically. Um, and they need to learn
things from a bigger classroom
environment than one that includes 10 to
12 children. Um, and so I could say more
than I'm sure three minutes is 42
seconds about
>> I love our community. I love our kids. I
think we need to be reasonable. And with
my remaining seconds, I want to say I
hate the the the the division that this
has created in our town. I hate the
attitude that all of us who are elders
who might voice opposition to what you
in the schools would present are
enemies, you know, or are people that
should be um spurned or should be um uh
looked at as not caring about children.
We care about children a lot. We just or
I just I'll say I just see my community
as inclusive of a wonderful school but
greater than that wonderful school.
Ron Lighto22
He Road
again just
this
>> far is not great
>> I'm Sorry.
>> So, I think I think the board of
education I think what people are having
trouble with is struggling with stuff
that they don't understand. We're
hearing things like
Valley or contractors due to expire July
this year, but it's already been renewed
before the budget. And I think that's
what people have concerns with.
when we care about the kids, when we
care about the the community,
it's it's working together like let's
wait until after to see and then go from
there. If you need a psychologist, hey
Boris Leman, you're looking to get a
psychologist, let's work together and
see if we can do that in the next couple
of years.
>> And I think that's where it all comes
apart. So, we're just asking, you know,
clarity of why did it get signed before
you? Okay. And you know some people are
saying you can be full-time benefits. Is
that true? If you are and you are
part-time, how come? That's what we just
want to have. I think if we get clarity
on everything and it's transpiring,
we're not going to have this discount.
This town has always worked with with
this school. There's kids that have
graduated from these schools that have
got great jobs and that have done well
and they'll continue to do so. And the
town wants to continue to work with the
school, but they don't want to feel like
they're held hostage over the school
every year. So, that's I think what
we're I think what everybody is looking
to hear. This is clarity.
>> You have a question.
>> No, I can answer that.
>> Absolutely. Welcome to
>> Okay. So, a few of these things have
been explained before. Of course, I know
not everybody was here at the last
meeting, so I'll be happy to submit them
again. With a contract, when you have a
three-year contract that's set to
expire,
you can't wait till the last day of
expiration because what happens if in
fact it's not going to be renewed or
somebody's not going to stay. So,
there's at least a three month span, at
least a three month span because let's
pretend I was going to retire. They
would need time to find someone new and
they would need time to go through the
hiring process and fill that position.
We did see what happened. Unfortunately,
we had a couple of open positions on the
town side where we were without
somebody. You never want that to happen.
So, you make sure that that position is
going to be filled. The other thing is
the superintendent puts the budget
together before they give it to the
board of ed. and then the board of ed
adopts the budget and then it goes to
the town.
I'm not the one that decides my
contract. The board of ed is. So I can't
put a dollar figure in my proposed
budget until I know what that number is.
So it is always done that you would do a
contract months before
>> March
>> it's set to expire. So if the last day
of this contract was June 30th, which it
was, it would happen in October, the day
you would decide what that new contract
would look like. So that if you were
parting ways, there would be time to
fill that position before June 30th. So
that's very common. There was nothing
non-transparent about that. That's
actually the way it gets done is that
you do it a few months ahead of time.
Um, Ron, the other question was, were
they include benefits?
>> Um, benefits. Yes, a contract does
include benefits. Just like on the TAL
side, we actually have part-time people
that get stipens for not taking
benefits.
It is a part of a contract. So, yes,
when I was hired originally, I was hired
to fulfill a position that the retired
person had been in. I'm not retired. So
I took a salary cut to have benefits.
They said this was what the amount was
that was the whole package to the
superintendent and I said I need
benefits for myself. So I took a cut in
salary so that I could have the benefits
included in that package. I didn't get
anything more. And there was a third
one.
>> Yes. About 80%.
>> Oh yes. We said this before. Thank you.
We have to have a service provider. Some
schools have a social worker, a guidance
counselor, and a school psychologist.
We don't. We have one person. So, I I
feel like sometimes if it was called a
guidance counselor or a social worker,
people would think that it was um more
appropriate. We just happen to have of
those three possibilities, we have a a a
school psychologist who does the testing
for students. was mandatory that we have
a support position. In our case, it's
just a school psychologist and she
wasn't always here. We had a fair amount
of her salary covered with a grant
though for 3 years and that grant is
expiring. And her class sizes four
through six, they are all 23 and above.
There aren't small classes being fourth,
fifth, and sixth grade until uh this
year we added the fourth and the fifth.
salary. We have to have somebody inv
jailable. It doesn't mean we have to
have a full-time psychologist.
>> Are you kidding?
>> That's not true, Ron. I wish it was, but
it's not. And if we contracted a um
psychologist just to come in and do the
testing, the cost um as a for a
contractor would be three times the
cost. It's about $150 per hour for them
to come in. So, we do have to have this
position. Ron, I I wish we did it. That
would be a place we could cut. We
cannot. That is a required position. The
banks.
>> Okay.
>> And I just want to clarify it briefly,
but one of the reasons frankly I
shouldn't redo this slide. The $90,000
figure we start to believe the full cost
and a here for for two or three years
running. We had $45,000 coming in grant
money that went away. So the net change
to the 10 is the 45. So, apologies if I
if I confused anyone with my slide.
>> My name is Michelle Lorettes. I'm from
149 Lake Road. I've been here for 33
years.
A lot of you know me. All right. So,
just so everyone is aware because we can
make comments this time. All right.
Special education is not a joke. A
school psychologist is not there to give
therapy to children outside of school. A
medical diagnosis is different than an
educational classification.
If your child has dyslexia, if they
suffer from ADHD, autism, or any other
mental health diagnosis, and they need
help in school to survive, they need a
psychologist to give an educational
classification. Without that, they don't
get services.
Okay? Now, the institutions have been
closed for 20 years. We no longer
institutionalize these children.
Does everyone understand so far? They
now are in the schools. It is inclusive
education.
Okay. So, you cannot deny them their
right
as a special education teacher. Okay. As
a a parent with two children that
receive services and they have since
they were three years old both speech
and psychology services. Okay. You are
denying not only the children in this
town, you are denying my children the
right to an equal and equitable
education.
And that's not fair.
So you say your taxes are getting
higher. Yeah. Yes. It's $5 a gallon.
Okay. But here's the thing. when you
don't look at the budgets equally, the
town budget and the school budget,
really, are you looking at the budget at
all? So, my question is, I understand
that we run on volunteers in this town.
Okay, I get that. But my question to you
is, are we really taking into
consideration
why people are voting no? And are you
voting no just to vote no because you
don't want your money to go somewhere
else? All right. Do you really is it
really that your taxes can't get higher
and you can't afford it anymore? If it
is, you should be relying on your social
services that your tax money paid for.
Okay? There's services in towns. There's
services in the state.
But with that, the other thing is
when we were at the board of finance
meeting, there were positions that were
being budgeted for that haven't been
filled in 3 years.
I only heard two people speak up about
it.
So,
what are we doing about these proposed
things, these proposed positions?
Can I just ask quick clarification?
So, we did make some adjustments um to a
couple of the salary line items and at
least one of them was for a position. I
don't think we've filled exactly. We've
been using so the assistant line for
instance for the town administrator. We
have been utilizing some money in that
role and we've been paying money but we
have been hired I think a specific an
extra person we looked at that why they
need to cut it. So can you just when you
um can you remind me the other bits that
you were curious about that why we
didn't that we may not have cut I just
want to make sure I'm addressing your
question properly.
figures
on here.
>> So, so the assistant line we cut a
little bit the project managers were
using that money. That's different.
>> Yep.
>> There was a whole building.
>> I'm trying to remember which one that
was then. I apologize, but I can't even
position.
>> Oh, yeah. I think you were the one that
said um we could cut it a little bit,
but there was no reason to cut it in
full because we might actually get
someone
talking about the property manager.
>> No, not after.
>> Was it the community assistant?
>> Community center assistant.
>> Okay.
>> It had to be someone that wasn't able to
be hired for years. I can't remember
what it was, but it was in the video and
I was kind of shocked at that. I can go
back.
>> Okay. I I apologize, but I
we'll see it.
>> Yes.
>> Because I would like to just
specifically if I could genuinely though
I I don't recall other than that
assistant to the town a lot that we
talked about.
>> Sorry.
>> Did you have a question? Yeah,
>> Louise
Lake.
Um, I just want to know I just want to
let everyone know that the special ed
monies are mandated. We do not reduce
any of that special ed money and we
never will.
>> So, a psychologist.
My daughter is in that field as well and
special ed is very important and has
never been reduced. They do require the
social workers to do the testing and
there has been social workers already
doing that testing. So we are not
reducing the AES at all in that manner.
I just want to clarify
>> just the board of finance doesn't have
line item control order budget where we
cut $50,000 from them. They're going to
have to go back and figure that out.
Where they take it from, that's not up
to us. So, I don't know what impact
specifically that $50,000 cut will have.
So, it works.
That's going to be their problem. and
they haven't gone until today. So, I
don't know where it would go. I don't
think it would be cut from the school
psychologist, but just FYI, we don't
know. All we can do is look at the
bottom line and say, is that number good
or not?
Hi, my name is Phil Huffy. I live at 218
Hebrew Road. I don't have a question. I
have a plea. I rely on seeing your
mouths move so I can understand what
you're saying. So please no cross
conversations. We're all coming up here
so I can actually see you speaking as
well as hearing. The mics attenuate the
sound. The reverberation also affects
the sound. So please if you're having
cross conversation
do it over the mic and let me see your
mouths moving. That's all. Thank you.
Okay. Georgia Conrad 117.
>> I've been town I've been in town 57
years.
And when I came to town,
I volunteered everywhere and I
eventually got on boards and things like
that. I was on the board of finance for
a number of years.
We have never
had special needs children
institutionalized.
>> Yes, you did. And so I just wanted to
clear that up
>> because when I was on the board of
finance and I was chairman and this is
like 20 25 years ago, they were not
institutionwise they were educated in
the handover school and if we had to
bust them out to a place where they
could be educated because we didn't have
the facilities we pay for them.
>> So let's clear that up. Oh, sweet.
>> I'm sorry, but that's the
>> fact
and
all right.
Hi, Linda Fish 111 Townson Road to
>> I just have a quick question. I
understand getting salaries up to par.
It is a small town and I know other
towns, other instances when you're
trying to get somebody up to par you do
it over two or three years and not in
one fell swoop. it would make it easier
on the budget and for people to
understand. So I'm just curious why all
at one time, not gradually.
>> So it's not actually all at one time. It
is gradually. We needed to make that
much of an addition in order to get her
closer to the bottom of the pack of
where everything is. She's still at the
bottom. And I can definitely email that
out to you guys if you'd like a bit more
information. I I just I guess my my
comment back is why are we spending this
entire meeting talking about the
superintendent's raise, which is equal
to about $10,000?
>> Is $10,000 a large percentage of your
taxes? Is it a large percentage of what
your tax increase is going to be? Are
there other more giant ways that we
could take money away from things that
is not the superintendent?
>> 11 possessed just an awful lot and
people don't understand that. I've had
the same salary for over 15 years and I
still work. U so just seems like a big
job to me.
So, Robert was asking she had a $5,000
increase last year. That is correct. Um,
it was part of a previous contract. So,
if you guys want to look at the actual
contract, you're more than welcome to do
so. They are posted on the school
website.
>> Hi, I'm Ashley Johnson. uh recently
moved here from Texas. Howdy y'all. Yes.
Yes. My address is 191 Lake Road.
>> Bring the mic.
>> Oh, I'm sorry. Um, okay. So, first I
just have a question for everybody.
Who believes that education is
important? Please.
>> All right.
Everybody in this room saw all the hands
up.
All right. Cool.
Who likes Andover?
>> All right.
So, can we all just admit that we all
love this place and that we're all
trying to do what we believe is best for
our town and our communities.
11%
is a bit of an increase, especially net
focus focus, especially for people on a
fixed income.
So, I can understand why anyone would
bulk at that. Yes, there are social
services for people. Yes, there are
things that we can do. But anytime that
you're going to ask more money from
people, we're all going to have
questions. We're all going to want to
know where exactly it's going. It's not
that we want to say no. I certainly
don't. Shoot, my kid goes here and I
love this school.
just remember that we're all on the same
side and we're all just trying to figure
this out together and to maybe give
everyone the benefit of the doubt and
not throw little snide jabs here and
there cuz I can guarantee you that ain't
going to help anybody.
Thank you.
Hi, Stacy Kaufman, 164 Lake Road. Um,
what's sticking out to me about this
budget is that this the Andover
elementary school budget failed, but the
RAM budget passed in this town.
I know it didn't pass in Heert and
Marboro. And that is shocking to me
because that per people expenditure is
$32,000 per student from the document
they shared. And um I don't know if
that's the norm for regional school
districts. I'm not overly familiar with
regional school districts, but that
seemed extremely high to me when most
towns are maybe between 19 and 26,000
per pupil. So, the fact that that one
passed in this town and the elementary
school budget didn't pass, I felt like
nobody was paying attention to that one.
And we care about our kids obviously at
all grade levels, but the things they've
presented here are things that it
appears they need. They're not trying to
pull one over on anyone. They need all
of these things. And yes, preschool is
legally mandated and we would have to
have it regardless. So, that was my
takeaway. And I just maybe think you
should look at the RAM budget also in
order to push our cost down.
>> I'm going to take off my badge and say
something as Linda
symbolically.
Um maybe Caitlyn to respond to your
thought maybe we haven't mentioned
tonight it's not all about Valer's
salary. It's also about a huge increase
in the AES budget overall. And when I
look at budget, and I am not on the
finance committee, thank god,
but when I look at the whole town, we do
love our whole town. If it's 100% of the
budget right now, don't we have 79%
going to education and 21 going to the
rest of the town? to me. Okay. A little
>> It might shift a little, but it's a very
small amount for the town to do
everything else besides the school. To
me, so I don't think we're just harping
on your side. It is unquestionable, but
I think we should also, and we did the
referendum, say, "Nope, it's too high."
And we're probably going to say it again
next week.
>> I don't think that's what we say.
The one thing I would just add regarding
our educational expenses is in ex this
is part of how it's presented in our
budgets and has been for years. But you
know we receive that $2 million from the
state every year the ECS fund the
educational cost share grant and that's
what they in my mind they're taking that
$80,000 additional aid out to when we
display the budget. You know, it's not
awesome that what we do not do is show
that coming off the ed budgets, right?
It comes off the whole town budget,
which fine. But when the only reason I
bring it up is if we're going to
discuss, you know, kind of the pie chart
of where our money goes, the whole idea,
you know, we're spending 70% of our
budget on education usually in any given
year. Sure, that's where our
expenditures go. Um, but we also receive
the state aid. I have issues with
frankly how we displayed a money grant
money in general and I'm going to
continue to address those as my time on
this board continues. Um, but I just
want to point that out that if you're
looking at it from the standpoint of
what we are paying for, there's
expenditures, right? And then there's
expenditures less funding, right? So
that's the one thing that could skew
those numbers. I think you could get two
different numbers and both be valid.
Just point that out.
Marcy Miner, a West Street. Um, I just
wanted to address the board of finance
because
uh I sent a letter and I requested that
we when we look past this budget and we
look at this budget um pass or fail
whatever uh that we do not include the
uh money that's coming back from the
state and from RAM because uh what I
understand is especially the money from
RAM is a one time refund. So I do not
think that we should be looking at that
when it comes to this budget. Any
increases that we receive now are
permanent. Budgets don't go down. So I
don't think we should be looking at that
at this budget because even if budgets
are flat, it's going to be increased
next year because this money is a
onetime thing.
So I would just say that on the
expenditures we pulled them off the
expenditures. You're correct that there
are one time
there are onetime chunks of money coming
up. The 258 from RA and the additional
CA8 I presume is a oneshot deal unless
they up and do it again next year.
Wouldn't count on that. That's that's
true. Same with use of fundamental.
We've done it in the past a couple
times. It's not new that we're doing it,
but again, that's a one shot from our
reserves, not recurring revenue. So,
that's true. Our expenditures have true
in here. I, you know, I I'm not I hope
you don't think I've misrepresented what
we're actually having. Uh, and I I came
up with a couple of different ways to
address the RAM, the 258k that they're
giving us back for the money they kept
too long. Um, if you take an at
conversation, this by the way with the
RAM superintendent about how we
presented in that referendum, I want to
make sure that it's the true number when
you saw that when my slide was I think
uh 4.25 million for RAM. That's our levy
without the offset because it's it's
misleading to Mar's point. If I were to
pull that number off, it looks like
RAM's giving us this big cut, which
isn't really true. Okay. So, it's always
a question of how to present the
information to show you, okay, we're
doing this to re reduce taxation this
year. But yes, you should all be aware
that
all things being equal, no other changes
that 350,000 versus 258 from 98 from the
state goes the way yesterday. Yes.
Correct.
>> Point is is that it wasn't deducted from
the line. line item is the actual budget
line item. We didn't deduct it and we're
not hiding from the fact that that
money's there. That's taken out
somewhere else. Line items are what they
are. We didn't deduct those amounts from
those line items. You're seeing the
accurate budgets whether we get that
money or not.
>> Right. We we it's only when we
calculated the taxes that you know you
pull that money out.
>> So basically we overpaid for a number of
years. And if I were to come my way, I'd
say,
um, give me the refund cuz I had a
property that I paid taxes for a whole
year and I overpaid on my taxes that
year. Now, I'm not going to ask the town
to do that because I know that would be
arduous. All right? But that's what I'm
just saying. You know, don't use it to
tell me that we're saving money this
year. Use it, you know, later. I mean as
one time it's one time uh refund.
>> So one thing I want to remind and you
know we we kind of have this
conversation every year. Our budget
always says 8year school budget and the
assumption is that that $4 million is
simply for what goes on in the
classrooms. And the thing is is it is 35
school roads budget. This gym right now,
when it gets heated, it gets heated on
our budget.
That's $10,000 a year in oil to heat
this gym. And we use the gym half the
time in basketball and pickle ball and
town meetings. Use it the other half of
the time. We're only in school 180 of
365 days in a school year. So all of
those expenses are our expenses to pay
out of our school budget for the largest
piece of town property. Everything about
this building is in our budget. We also
do not have a capital budget. Almost
every school state in Connecticut has a
capital and an operational. So when
you're looking at our budget, it is our
operational capital budget up until now
all rolled in one. We talked about RAM.
When you look at RAM, just because it's
our neighbor or Hebrin or Marlo, those
schools have an operation and a capital
budget. I do not. So, everything that
needs to be fixed in this building up to
this date has come out of our
operational budget. While the oil, the
heat, the hot water, everything comes
out of that budget. It is not just what
goes on in the classrooms. the cutting,
the grass, everything is on our budget.
>> Jeff Magguire, 422 Lake Road. Um,
I kind of have a problem with that logic
because we're one town. We all have to
pay for everything. And there are things
on the town budget, let's say, like
plowing the parking lot for the school
that are not paid for by the school,
paid for by the town. So that whole
logic drives me insane. Just to let
everybody here understand that
now, thank God
we don't allow the school to operate the
capital budget because the town would
have been out $180,000 on the bathroom.
So, thank God they don't allow the
schools that we handle the capital
project. And thank the superintendent
for acknowledging that this is a town
building.
Everybody heard it, right? It's a town
building. It's our biggest asset. It's
what we need to take care of the most.
And I really have a problem with the
focus from the board of finance on how
we're paying for what we need to pay for
because you have to focus on expenses.
I I'm I'm I know I don't have a lot of
qualifications. That was made painfully
clear, but I am a CPA and I own multiple
businesses and I deal with budgets all
the time. I have never had anyone come
to me and give me a budget that I just
passed through. Right? And since I am
the board of finance for my companies, I
have never let anyone come to me and sit
there and said, "I need this increase
because I need it. I want it." And I
have never sat there and just let anyone
push it right past you without any
changes. That's happened for two years.
The board of finance has sat there and
taken what the school has asked for and
sat there and passed it right through.
Right? And I'm not sitting there saying
to cut crazy. I'm sitting there saying
to listen and to collaborate because
I'll ask the board of finance my
question. Here's my question. Did
everyone on the board of finance get all
of the information from the town that it
needed to make its decisions and from
the board of education? All of your
questions answered?
>> No.
No town. Did the town screw with you?
>> Did not screw with me.
>> No, no, no, no, no, no. I'm asking if
you didn't get information from the
town, did you not get all of the
information from the town?
>> I would say actually to my satisfaction
personally as the visa board chair, not
really because we had massive turnover
at the town hall. It's nobody's
particular fault. I'm not casting blame.
I hate to do that. What I am saying is I
had some questions about what the
balances are various capital funds. I do
not feel we have a sanctity on that. We
have the almost finished audit,
but I wanted a new treasurer to true up
those numbers and reconcile. She has not
been able to do that yet and for all of
the funds. This is not some great
travesty. She's working hard. I
understand. But if you ask me that
question finally like that, yeah, the
answer is not quite. It doesn't mean I
don't think your town much
>> fromations
got information.
>> You know perfectly well that there have
been requests made by members of my
board that they don't feel have been
appropriately answered. Yes.
>> Question.
>> No, we're not. Um so so those are
problems I have with how we conduct
business within the time because if we
are not collaborative to the point we
need to be and if we were collaborative
this would be a lot easier process a lot
and so the other thing that I have
because I always ask it and I'm going to
ask the board of education members right
here um
I won't ask you the normal question I
ask is if the prek is costing the
taxpayers money I might ask you a
question because it really goes to
everything. Have you considered raising
tuition on the prek program?
>> So, this has been discussed multiple
times. As everyone is aware, if you've
been to any board of education or town
meeting, starting next year, so not this
coming school year, but the school year
after, preK is mandated for our entire
state starting in 2027. It's not an
option. It's not only for kids that are
special ed. It is mandated by the state.
We are waiting to change what we do with
the prek program until we get direction
from the state on what that entails
exactly because there are different
amounts of money that are given for
different children in different income
brackets and they to be honest quite
frankly haven't sorted it all out yet.
Look at how shortsighted our state is in
terms of giving additional funding to
our towns at this time. So, we're not
going to make changes to that. But yes,
it's it's a great point because next
year the education budget will include
all of preschool. When you guys look at
it, it's going to look really different
because it's going to have positives and
negatives. It's going to have tuition
in, it's going to have grants in, and
it's going to have money handed. And to
be clear, um, special education is
mandated currently for kids between age
three and five. So after they age out of
birth to three until they start
kindergarten. If we had those costs in
our budget for all the kids that need
those services, the board of education
budget would likely be close to $200,000
more than what it currently is. we are
able to take advantage of some of those
services being grantfunded because the
teachers are grant funded because they
are part of the preschool program.
>> I I also have a question.
>> Um
I have 40 seconds.
>> Okay, take your time.
>> Okay. So, so my my my question related
to that I'll ask the other question. Are
all the grant dollars that the board of
education receives included in this
budget that we see or are there grant
dollars that are received and extra
costs that are spent by the board of
education?
>> Everybody needs both.
>> So the difference between what you're
asking is if something is supplemental
or if it's supplanted. Is that correct?
>> In our expenses that we see on
>> So any grant that could be subtracted
from a line item in the budget, it is
subtracted. So that line item looks
lower than what it would look like, but
the grants are not in the budget. You're
not seeing those in the budget. You're
just seeing the end lesser total.
And there are many grants that the
school gets that are they they are in
addition to or for specific things.
They're not to take money away from
something. So for example, like the
afterchool program grant, that grant is
not something that could have replaced
something in the budget. is to to
provide additional services.
>> So So you and I could have worked
together to really get all of the
information out and done a really good
job and made everybody here comfortable
with how all of the spending was done if
we would work together. I'm just saying
that's me, right? So I'm done.
>> I'm Bill D. grocerers um 232 virtual
vote and board finance member and I
think exception Jeff what you just said
this board spends hours
week for 3 months going through the
budget we don't pass anything through we
ask Randy to come talk to us we have to
explain line by line everything that's
in that budget we ask as many questions
we as we can to try and understand every
line item from every budget every salary
We never take anything and pass it
through. And I dare anybody here to say
that. Do we do we just pass it through?
We labor for hours trying to make sure
we understand every single thing in that
budget. We never pass anything through.
Yeah,
you don't have the we don't have access
to a lot of level detail of
>> Well, I I disagree with that. We see her
full budget and we see
>> 21% increase in insurance cost, $45,000
increase for the psychiatrist, which is
mandated by law. You lost the grant. I
can go on and on and on. It's not a
frosting on the cake here. It's real
expenses to run the school. It's not
just, oh, let's do this, that, and the
other thing. It's it's all real stuff.
We don't pass anything through without
going through.
>> Sorry, that's just accident.
now.
>> Hey Gabby. Um,
>> so again, 191 Lake Road.
So, wait, uh, Ashley Johnson, we're
allowed to comment, right, on what other
people have said.
>> Three minutes starts now. Okay.
I'm so sorry, sir. I forgot your name.
>> Jeff McGuire.
>> Jeff Maguire. Okay. So
maybe I'm going to say this and not
trying to be mean. Again, I'm texting.
I'm southern.
So if you want to work with people,
you have to meet them where they're at.
That goes for everybody on this board.
And I know everybody knows that. We're
in a school. We all learn this in prek
and kindergarten, right?
>> I'm I'm going to be nice.
>> Oh, don't make me
Oh, honey, bless your heart. Um, so you
say that you and this young lady could
have met together and worked together. I
will say that sometimes your tone does
make it a little bit hard for people to
address you, just as sometimes her tone
can be a little bit hard because we're
passionate. you're both passionate
people about this and maybe Okay, so I
see whenever you go ahead and you send
out a newsletter to everybody in the
community on your own dimen paper, by
the way, like that's some good quality
paper.
So, you're sending this out on your own
dime.
I see someone who cares,
but I also see somebody who could it
could maybe be taken as
kind of undermining
the the school budget and that is not a
way to work with people. So if when
you're saying that you want to work with
someone,
we give everybody respect.
Thank you for the information that you
give out. However, you do need to show
respect to these and to these young
ladies. And then you don't have to drag
our butts out here at 7:00 at night when
I could be at home in my comfy PJs. I'm
wearing a bra for God's sake
anywhere here.
So,
I would just suggest that maybe y'all
show some respect to each other and
bring food. It always does.
So uh anybody who has not anybody who
has not spoken yet
134 Bears Road I just have logistics
questions really I know I usually have a
lot of comments suggest suggestions, all
those kind of things. Um, can we please
get u posted on the website um the manil
rate page, you know, or you know, that
really gives us all a lot of information
because the total tax dollars, the cuts,
you know, the glad to see that we have
put fund balance against it, but I kind
of want to see the total projected
expenses, things of that nature. It's
hard to really all of us to make good
decisions about our voting when we can't
see that end game, you know, and know
what the cuts are. The other thing I did
want to ask is, you know, it was brought
up that that health employee benefits
are a big cost and a big driver.
Salaries, of course, things that can't
be changed. We all get that. Um,
Val, I just wanted to ask real quick in
the board of ed publication, do we have
the health benefit line on here that I
could
>> There is a there is a health line in
budget. Yeah.
>> Okay. Because I know where the benefits
are. I'm just trying to get a dollar
amount. I mean, it's very expensive what
the town does pay on health benefits. We
all know they're skyrocketing. We also I
also want to personally point out I'm
very much in favor where I'm going with
this that I think all of our employees
need to get the best of benefits. I'm
happy you know that we're able to
provide that and we want to keep that
going if they're qualified. So I was
looking for the dollar amount so that I
could have forecast what I know what the
the town I think is going to be paying
254,798.
I just couldn't come up with the board
event number. So my only thought to
maybe the board of selectment, it's been
brought up quite a bit of times that we
do have this healthc care stipen that's
in the budget, you know, under
healthcare benefits. Um, again, I want
anybody that needs insurance to get
insurance, please take it. Family,
single, two people, whatever that is.
But the stipen has gotten to a really
high rating since healthc care has
skyrocketed. So now I think we're
playing paying some of the employees
maybe $7500 not to take insurance which
equates to maybe 145 a week, 600 a month
and a big a big draw on our budget. So
it's been talked about for years
dropping that to a level that other
towns do. So, I'm hoping that the board
of seleinant is considering that even
2,400 would be 200 a month, which is a
nice token. If this was a good idea, you
know, every other town would be doing
it. There's no other town that I can
find. They have statements, but they're
like 2,2400
things of that nature. So, I'm
personally hoping that we can drop that
this year and we can work on that in the
budget to a more livable extent.
>> So, as we start to kind of wrap this up,
right, have much more discussion, but
just a couple of more questions. Yes, I
can hear you. Just a second.
>> Uh, I guess. Yeah, as Joanne was asking
about well I just want to make sure she
understood it. Um because I think there
was a question in the beginning there
about you know what we looked at one of
the things about the payment in lie of
the healthcare thing for simple child
employees as I understand it and I can
be correcting me if I'm wrong about this
course uh that's tied to 50% of a
individual plan what it would cost now I
think it would be up to them to alter
anything so to do so but the the flip
side to that obviously the risk is And
then people say, "Well, all right, then
I'll take the insurance," which would be
probably drastically more expensive. So
that's why for my money, I'm I think
we're doing an okay job there. That
would be money on that. Okay. Um, and
then I'll I'll just really quickly, I
just want to mention one other thing
about grant funding and what's in the
budget, what's not in the budget. This
is something that spurred me now for a
little while and I intend to continue to
work on it. Um, as board of finance
chair, with our new town administrator,
with our new treasurer,
there's not everything on the town side
is displayed. We get it should be. I
agree, but it's not and it never has
been. As far as I know, this board
probably since I've been in town since
we don't show you the town a road grant
and then the total amount we spent on
roads. Let me show you what we're
loading into the town road fund. That's
not the same thing. So, I am all for I
want to get as much information out
there and accurate as possible going
forward. But if we're going to talk
about what's not in there and not in
there, this is a both sides of the house
issue. Just to be clear,
>> she's going to she's going to talk more,
but she doesn't really have to say.
Go ahead.
>> She's talking for me, Linda.
>> I'm sorry. I'm going to have other
people who have not. So, if you want to
come up, you want to talk, come up,
>> but Michelle has spoken.
>> All right. All right.
>> Can't see us. and somebody
>> Joe King 86 school road and back.
>> I want to know why you aren't soliciting
from the top or exactly why they voted
up or down on the budget. Are you
guessing what they changed? What they
want changed? And without that
information, you can't do your job
properly. And what are you going to
publicly do about it? If you want, I
want you to address and wear t-shirt in
person and Zoom meetings as well. She
Okay. So, you understand what I'm
talking about? I got it. All right.
Rebuttal.
I'm not trying to rebut anything. First
of all, we didn't what was
I just want to so I want to make sure
you've seen and we just
>> Okay, sorry.
>> We discussed this before the meeting. I
don't feel like we see exactly eye to
eye on it. However, my take is we see
the vote totals. We see the advisory
questions. We get public feedback either
in the form of emails from residents or
comments at our meetings. There is no
perfect perfect information but I also
don't really understand the mechanism by
which we would canvas the whole town for
there or at least the the people who
participated there are threatened more
than we do. That would work. I don't
have a problem with more information.
More information is great but I don't
know how we would go about doing that
functionally that would work. It would
be a workable process. And as you point
out, and we discussed this before the
meeting, there's issues with what's
representative, who shows up at this
meeting, who comes to the board of
financing, who answers our queries. All
of those would be subsets of the people
who voted in the referendum. So, I'm
open to ideas, yes, but I don't quite
follow how we would go about doing
getting more information about the
precise changes that town residents want
to a given portion of the budget than we
already did. That's my take.
>> The public speaking meetings with the
mult there are multiple evidence of this
as I said. representatives. There are
the referendum results, the advisory
questions at the referendum, comments at
our board meetings, comments at these
town meetings,
letters or you know emails sent to
members of the boards of personal
conversations as well. Of course, there
are always an option if you know some of
us and you know for those that monitor
social media, I personally don't. I
admit
uh there's plenty of chatter there as
well. All of those things represent
subsets of people who would vote on a
referendum. So which slice is the
accurate slice? You know, we do our
best. That's my
>> next meeting.
Hi, I'm Bob Hamburger, 101 Shotty Mill
Road. I've only lived in town 38 years,
not like some of you long-timers. Um, I
want to talk about something that um is
really just a very small subset of
what's been discussed here. something
that I feel though would be operational
and could reduce some of the contention,
some of the friction that we're seeing
here. And this this idea that I'm going
to talk about is actually something that
is done to some extent but not
rigorously by the various boards and
commissions. And that's the level of
documentation that we have to back up
our ideas. Now, I come to this uh as a
lifelong electrical engineer. I've
worked in industry. I've worked in
university research settings and when I
come up with an idea I have to make sure
that it is bulletproof. It is
defensible. It is justifiable and to do
that I have to establish a rigorous
chain of documentation for the ideas
that I have that lead to the conclusions
that I draw. Now some of this was
alluded to very early in the meeting.
Caitlyn, you responded to someone on
this side saying it would be egregious
to have to email them the 20 or so uh
contracts that were used to justify
Val's uh compensation. And Val, I don't
mean to pick on you, but it's a it's a
good example of of what I'm talking
about. So I think it behooves everyone
here on every commission, every board
when you're doing research, if you're
doing something online, you find a piece
of information, you find a document that
you are going to be using to justify a
position, you take note of that. You
copy and paste that into a spreadsheet
or a word document or something like
that so that you have an irrefutable
documentary chain of where these ideas
originate and how they relate to the
conclusions that you're drawing. This is
the kind of thing that's always done in
academia. Val, I'm sure you did it when
you put your uh thesis together. I'm
sure you have pages and pages of
references. A document like this where
the curious reader as they say in
academia can go back to the original
sources can be made available
electronically. We can post it on our
website and I think it would cut down
tremendously on the amount of friction
that we see back and forth because
somebody who challenged something we can
say no here it is this is what I'm
basing it on. There's no question about
it. That's my idea.
So, as we I I know I know I'm just
throwing out the a moment of breath and
check in because it's pretty soon we're
going to wrap up, you know, a good
discussion, good questions,
but we'll start to move towards that if
someone at some point in the near future
tonight has a motion to adjourn. So
>> yes,
>> this is super 30 seconds. Joanne would
ask something and I totally want to
answer it. I flute it out of my mind.
Yes, I will try to get the new
presentation with the bill rate
calculations posted um to the website.
I'll get to Kate and I'll ask her to put
it up there. Right. And I want to ask
you to weave up the old one so people
can toggle between and say, "Okay, this
is the change." All right. I'll try to
get that done shortly.
>> Good evening everybody. I'm Jerry K. I
live at 8 Woodurn Way in Angola. I've
lived there since 2005.
Um
I'd like to thank the people who
volunteered their time.
the board is fine.
I've always wanted to volunteer. I I
never wanted to be
>> just on a wall when I retired. So, the
first thing I did
is I read a briefing to River had an ad.
They wanted somebody the board of
education
write your letter of intent. why he
wanted me to be on the board of
education.
I'm implying
I was the only one.
There was nobody else.
And
I thank the people who are here this
evening. I don't care.
I care also.
I care from a couple of different
directions.
I am a senior citizen.
I've had lunch with our seniors. I've
enjoyed senior citizen activities.
I am a senior citizen on a fixed income.
It's been that way for over 10 years.
But that's okay.
Every time we've had one of these budget
meetings, every year after year, I hear
the same things.
Now
keep in mind
correct me if I'm wrong. Jeff, you take
care of people for the cab. Correct. You
you take care.
>> Good boy.
>> And
you you said our board was responsible
for hiring the superintendent.
>> So I take responsibility for that,
hiring the superintendent.
She was the best decision I think I've
made in my 71 years of living.
She's done an outstanding job and she's
made this school and the town shine on
the top of the building
and she's applied for grant. I think
she's got a super job.
Mhm.
>> I think the people you hire, if you want
good people,
you need to hire them
carefully and be willing to pay them.
>> I know it's hard on a fixed income as a
senior citizen. I also come to you as a
former elementary school teacher. I
taught at South Windsor Pleasant Valley
Elementary School for 17 years.
Prior to that, I taught at Bley
Elementary School in West Gartford with
special ed.
And
that's where I I found that I really
belong.
I It's not about me. It's not about me.
It's about people. It's about kindness.
It's about love.
It's about care.
caring for your family,
being kind to the people in your family.
I want to thank you for coming out this
evening and for being here. Please
appreciate the people who are living in
this town are your neighbors and stolen
residents.
And keep in mind, we don't get paid
and we we work hard, but that's okay.
>> We signed up for that bomb.
And I hope you go out in here to have a
much warmer heart for your people who
take care of the child. They do a super
job.
>> Andrea Kane 115 Lakeside Drive. I'd just
like to move to a journal.
Second.
>> I'll second.
>> All those in favor stand up.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Thank you.
>> Have a good evening. It was